[AUDIO LOGO]
>> CHARLES SHULTS: It's going
to pervade our lives at every
level very soon.
So it's good to know where
we stand, what it means,
and what it's all about.
All of this is an
exploration to see
how we can open up
the brain without,
of course, destroying
the autonomy
of the individual person.
The big question is,
if it's smart enough
to understand what you're
instructing it to do,
why would it want to do
what you tell it and not
what it wants to do?
We're going to be merged with
machinery the way things are
going, and perhaps that
might be the solution
to an impending machine disaster
that people imagine coming.
What makes you you?
Life itself is natural
nanotechnology.
>> REGINA MEREDITH: Explain
what you mean by that.
Today's guest, Sir
Charles Shults,
has worked on weapons
systems, missile systems,
and advanced attack helicopter
systems for the aerospace
industry.
All of this led him to work
into the area of robotics
and AI for which he
attained knighthood.
He is here to have a very
direct conversation about AI
and how the citizens
of Earth will
be confronted with its use.
Good or bad, we're going
to take a nice look at it.
Charles, welcome to Open Minds.
>> Shults: Thank you.
It's a pleasure to be here.
>> REGINA: This should be--
you're so articulate
and well versed.
This should be a really
fascinating conversation
because it's scary for
people to contemplate.
If you're under
20, it's exciting.
If you're over 20, you
have some questions.
There's very--
>> Shults: Absolutely.
>> REGINA: --much a
generational divide on this one.
>> Shults: It is.
It is.
>> REGINA: It is.
So first of all,
everyone's saying sir?
But he doesn't have
a British accent.
How did you end
up being knighted?
>> Shults: Well, it's
interesting because many
knighthoods are conferred
by other kings and domains.
King of Sweden,
the King of Denmark
have knights in their
service, but it actually
came about because
I was knighted
by a Scottish Baron who
purchased the Leslie baronage.
And under the terms
of the Magna Carta,
landed barons were
allowed to knight people,
and that was in 1215, and
it's not been repealed.
So I was awarded a five-year
grant and a knighthood
to pursue my research in
artificial intelligence
and robotics.
>> REGINA: Well,
and you're here,
and you were able to do
that with that grant too.
>> Shults: Absolutely.
>> REGINA: Wonderful.
And I know you have a
splendid piece of property
where you're coming up
with all kinds of stuff.
So we won't even get
into that just yet.
So first of all, we're
talking about brain implants.
This is something that has
been rather frightening
for a lot of people,
especially people
who frequent a lot of
conspiracy sites, in particular.
And I want to start
tearing down what
we have reason to
be concerned about
and what we have reason
to be excited about,
because whether we like it
or not, AI is here to stay,
and it's going to become
an increasingly more
prevalent part of our
lives on every level.
>> Shults: It will.
It absolutely will.
And as a lot of
people point out,
it's one of those technologies
that, like a video game
or like instant
communications, is
going to pervade our lives
at every level very soon.
So it's good to know where
we stand, what it means,
and what it's all about.
>> REGINA: I absolutely agree.
Go ahead.
>> Shults: So well,
to start with,
a lot of the research lately
has been in an effort to open
the human mind.
And the fact is,
the human mind has
been locked away since the
beginning of humankind.
And there's not an easy
communication-- well,
communication channel.
In and out of it
we speak, we draw,
we communicate
with other people,
but that's a limited bandwidth.
You can only share so much.
When we get down to the
ability to literally tap
into the computers that
reside in the brain
and get information
in and out of them,
suddenly, we have
a huge expansion
of what we're capable of.
Primarily right now, people are
looking at movement control,
such as paralysis or
spinal cord injury, how
they can read the
signals out of the brain
and bypass the damaged areas
and restore movement and control
the people.
And that's a big plus.
>> REGINA: Yeah, and we're going
to go down that rabbit hole
a little further because we
have a couple of different
technologies out there.
One of them is Elon
Musk's Neuralink
which frightens a
lot of people that
are watching this right now.
But when you're talking
about opening the human mind,
there's a transcendental
element to that.
It's not just raw data in there.
It's capability, right?
>> Shults: Right.
That's true.
And everybody shares
a lot of skills
that are lost if they can't
communicate them properly.
There's an old
African proverb that
says, "When an old man dies, a
library burns to the ground."
Well, all of the experiences
you've had in your life
are locked away in your head.
And only the handful who are
articulate writers or producers
of scripts or works
of manuscripts
that carry that
information in textbooks
can get that out to people.
We're reaching a
stage now where you
may be able to transfer
whole blocks of experience
and knowledge in a few moments
by literally opening up
channels of data
into your brain.
>> REGINA: One of the things it
says here in my notes is nature
has limited I/O.
>> Shults: Oh, yes, I/O--
>> REGINA: In-- for minds.
What does that even mean?
>> Shults: That's
input and output.
>> REGINA: OK.
>> Shults: So what are
your primary channels?
Your mouth, you
speak, your hands
for communicating on a
keyboard perhaps or the works
that you create with
your hands and your mind.
And that has really been the
rule for many, many thousands
of years.
Recently, we found with printed
word, with recorded sound,
with video, we can transfer
a lot more experience
and information.
The problem is, are
we using it properly?
When we get into
the bandwidth that's
available by directly
tapping into the brain,
we suddenly have a
wealth of experience
that can be transferred
from one person to another.
And recent
experiments have shown
how you can actually transfer
memories or even alter or erase
memories.
All of this is an
exploration to see
how we can open up the brain
just like you can open up
the hard drive of a computer and
have full access to it without,
of course, destroying
the autonomy
of the individual person.
>> REGINA: Then you say this is
a function of nature that has
limited it.
Do you believe there has been
any other kind of programming
interference and so forth?
>> Shults: Well, I would say
I don't see anything directly
indicated.
But I do know that there
was never any real reason
to change the amount
of input and output
that any brain and
any animal had.
It wasn't until we
developed spoken
and then written language
that we were able to do it
in any significant way.
And if you think
about it, libraries
were the repositories
of knowledge,
and even that became
a tool of warfare.
The Library of Alexandria
was destroyed twice
because limiting the
knowledge and information
of a culture made them weak.
They didn't have access
to the tools of the trade.
They didn't have access to
the information they'd saved.
So it actually became
a very negative thing
to be able to destroy
all their information.
Today, of course, information
is stored everywhere
and is available everywhere.
So the thought of losing
it all doesn't really
make sense right now.
>> REGINA: No, it doesn't
because of the cloud.
>> Shults: Correct.
>> REGINA: OK, so going back,
just for a moment before we
move on here and dig down
into these technologies,
the transcendental part I
talked about a moment ago.
When we think of
Indigenous cultures,
oftentimes they already had
more advanced technologies
mentally--
telepathy, the ability to
see beyond time and space,
know when someone was coming,
remote view and all that,
which really were our
innate human capacities.
And it seems as though those
were actually limited and shut
down as we became more
sophisticated, more educated.
>> Shults: Well, I think one
of the things that has to be
explored is how we always talk
about five senses but we really
have far more than that.
>> REGINA: Far more, yes.
>> Shults: Even the sensation
of being thirsty is a sense,
the sensation of balance.
The vestibular system,
that's a sense.
We have a tendency to
raise a gate against noise.
So things that we
don't fully process,
things that happen in
the background that
don't seem to have
significance in the moment,
we tend to ignore.
But the brain
doesn't forget them
or doesn't ignore
them internally.
So people who are
creative appear
to have the ability to
lower that noise threshold
and still remain functional.
Of course, they always say
that many artists are mad,
but that's a matter of
opinion, I would say.
>> REGINA: That's
a matter of-- yeah,
insanity is a matter of opinion.
>> Shults: But I would say that
we have many other channels
of communication besides
body language and facial--
>> REGINA: Verbal and--
>> Shults: --and non-verbal
communication that we use
to transfer information
from other people.
And there could be other
channels we're not aware of.
I don't discount
the possibility.
I just know that what's
been most effective for us
is what we're able to measure,
record, playback, see,
and share on a very clear level.
>> REGINA: Well, so that's
scientific materialism for you,
isn't it?
>> Shults: That's true.
>> REGINA: OK.
So let's talk
about the Neuralink
because we're talking
about interface with AI
and its interface
with the brain.
And that's the first
thing that comes up
in most people's minds
who look into this
is Elon Musk's Neuralink.
And it frightens people because
they think, oh, my God, we're
all going to be tethered to a
central computer and "Minority
Report" and everything else.
They're going to know
what we're thinking.
And so that's the
first place that people
who are concerned about AI go.
But let's talk about the
reality of what it actually
is, what it's designed
to do right now compared
to what it's thought to
be used for in the future.
>> Shults: All right.
So that is a valid
concern that we
could be vulnerable to
more sorts of attacks
we never imagined before.
But primarily,
what this is about
is getting information out of
the human skull that can be
used to help make life better.
And so the initial studies we're
looking at movement control.
And some of the
initial studies also
showed that we could predict
from the firings of groups
of neuro-cells neurons
in the brain, what
you were thinking of doing.
And this could be translated
into actual commands
to move a peripheral
such as a robotic limb
or play a video game
or operate a machine.
And with the proper
technology, it
could be routed to
a paralyzed limb
so you could take
control of it once again.
So it was actually done
in really the true spirit
of beneficiality, making
people able to live more fully
and repair damage as occurred.
>> REGINA: Wasn't it
specifically targeted for brain
injury and spinal cord injury?
>> Shults: Yes, that's
exactly correct.
There was a lot of
work done previously
using compounds like oxytocin
and high levels of oxygen
that allowed nerve
tissue to actually heal
to a large degree.
But there are limits to
what can be done with that.
This allows you the ability
to actually bypass a missing
chunk of nerve tissue.
If you can make a model
of a part of the brain
and what it's doing and you
can replicate its function,
you can then replace
that with something that
isn't going to age or
wear out in the same way
the brain tissue would.
It's not subject to disease
or chemicals or poisons.
It's something that actually
could be recorded and played
back and restructured again.
>> REGINA: So essentially, the
brain is encouraged to reroute
that neural pathway to
another one that's functioning
to create an original healthy
effect in movement or brain
function?
>> Shults: Well, in
some cases, that's true.
Sometimes when there's
damage in the brain,
portions of the brain undergo
a process called recruitment,
where they gather
groups of neurons
and retrain them to
act as surrogates
for those portions
that are damaged.
And it isn't always
100% effective,
but it's certainly useful.
I mean, the brain is a
very plastic, flexible,
learning machine.
But what we're looking
at now is actually
getting around damaged or
missing tissue perhaps.
>> REGINA: The more that
recruitment part of the story.
>> Shults: Right.
You can't actually recruit
tissue that doesn't exist.
If you've had a tumor, for
instance, and let's say
it affected your ability
to do mathematics,
and they remove that tissue.
And now you're
unable to understand
simple things like the number
line or what calculating is.
What if they came up with
a chip, for instance,
that could model the
mathematical functional part
of the brain?
And they implant the chip
and you spent a few weeks
learning to study how it works.
You become proficient,
and pretty soon you're
calculating square roots
and numbers in your head
like you never could.
But it raises a question,
are you actually thinking
about the numbers?
And so for some people,
that's a tricky thing.
It's a slippery-- you can't
really decide they feel.
But here's the thing.
If you're using a
calculator, are you
thinking about the numbers?
>> REGINA: Exactly.
>> Shults: Well, if you have
a calculator in your head that
you didn't have to touch the
buttons on and you're still
understanding what the concepts
are and how they function,
I'd say that you're actually
thinking about the numbers.
>> REGINA: You're choosing
to instruct something,
so it's a choice that
you've made to engage with
the numbers.
>> Shults: That's right.
>> REGINA: Even if the
calculation is happening
at lightning speed on some other
level that your natural brain
wouldn't have come up with.
>> Shults: Exactly.
>> REGINA: Yeah.
And yeah, I mean, these are
all big philosophical questions
that we're talking about here.
>> Shults: Well, imagine
the ability to, let's say,
replace individual neurons.
Let's suppose we had
some nanomachine that
could go into the brain,
locate damaged tissue,
and build valid copies,
working copies around--
>> REGINA: And that is what's
being worked on right now.
>> Shults: Yeah, eventually
we'll get to that.
But what would happen if, let's
say, every neuron of the brain
was slowly replaced
by a machine neuron,
and over the space of, like,
10 years every one of them
got replaced until you were
nothing but nanoneurons?
Well, you'd still feel the same.
You wouldn't notice
any difference.
Your memories and experiences
would still be there.
Is it you?
That's a very tough
question to answer.
>> REGINA: Well, this is where
the esoteric part becomes very
important.
And that is, those
who feel they actually
have something beyond
the meat of the brain
and those who feel they
have a spirit or soul.
In which case, if that's
permeating the brain,
even if the functions have been
taken over mechanically, so
to speak, how much affect
does that spirit or soul have?
>> Shults: And that raises a
question that actually leads
to an experiment.
>> REGINA: OK, tell me.
>> Shults: If a part of
your brain is damaged,
does it damage your soul?
Because if it
does, then the soul
is just as mutable as the brain.
And if it doesn't, then
why doesn't the soul
move around the function of
that missing part of the brain?
>> REGINA: Which
oftentimes it does.
We call it miracles.
>> Shults: There do seem to
be miracles in the world.
I can't deny that at all.
I've seen some
astounding things.
>> REGINA: Yeah, but it's
not the most common thing.
But yes, it does exist where
for many people unaware,
they're totally
unaware even of what's
breaking down and
being corrected
all the time on their behalf.
And so unless you're in
an accident and something
severe like this happens,
you wouldn't know.
And then if it repairs
itself at that rate,
you're talking what
looks like a miracle when
it's just our capability.
>> Shults: It's possibility.
But I think that maybe what
we're going to discover
is a lot of what we think
of as the soul ends up
to be the data of
your experience
and the data of how
you make decisions.
And I mean, there's no
question if somebody
were to destroy your
brain you'd be gone.
>> REGINA: You'd be gone.
>> Shults: Yet your soul,
your pattern of information
and existence and
everything you've done--
>> REGINA: Continues.
>> Shults: --many
would argue continues.
>> REGINA: Absolutely.
I mean, it becomes repository
known as the subconscious,
and you get to drag it
forward if you reincarnate.
>> Shults: Well, and there's
something to think about.
Everything in the universe
has an effect on spacetime,
on the vacuum itself.
Every charge, every movement,
every spin, everything does.
Perhaps what we refer to
as the soul is actually
this imprint on spacetime.
I mean, that's the thought.
>> REGINA: Yeah, an
individuated imprint.
>> Shults: Could be.
>> REGINA: Yeah.
Well, it is interesting
because that's
where the philosophical
questions really
start taking off.
We can go into all kinds
of territory with it.
>> Shults: True.
>> REGINA: But now sticking
to the terrestrial part
and the philosophical parts
over, who's running the brain?
I was listening to an interview
with Elon Musk, whose company
is creating the Neuralink.
And he says for
the next 10 years
it's to be used for spinal
cord injury and brain damage.
And they're well on
their way in this now.
And he said in the end, AI
is going to be so ubiquitous,
you're really only going to
have a choice of the provider.
And the provider which you--
you, your biggest decision
will be who is that provider?
You have to understand
what the capability to--
for input and output from
that provider so that
you don't step in a situation
in which someone else is playing
God over your own brain.
>> Shults: Sure.
So I guess the question
is, which company do you
trust to build brain replacement
parts and not install adware.
>> REGINA: Exactly, or malware.
>> Shults: And here's
the other thought.
>> REGINA: Yeah.
>> Shults: If I'm baking a
cake, I don't go into the oven
halfway through the process
and start adding things
to the batter.
It's not going to
be the same cake.
Well, then what about the
growth and development
of a mind, of a personality?
At what point do you
decide that they're done
and you can start
adding or subtracting?
This is a very tricky question.
>> REGINA: It is tricky.
I mean, if you just look
at basic brain development,
no one should have anything
to do with it short
of serious injury before the
brain develops at age 28.
>> Shults: That's pretty
much the way I feel about it.
>> REGINA: Yeah.
>> Shults: You don't want to
alter the normal development
in ways that could result
in a person or personality
that's entirely different from
what was originally happening.
>> REGINA: I
couldn't agree more.
So here you have
that, and then you
have Musk saying, this
is another use of it,
nothing to do with the human.
Now we're talking flat
out technological AI.
And he's oftentimes off in
his projections of time,
and he'll say, I don't
know the timing on things.
I'm guessing, my best guess.
And his best guess
is that by 2050, it
will be very common
for people to have
household helpers, robots.
>> Shults: Well, I
would agree with that.
>> REGINA: And he said they'll
be about the price of a car,
so most middle income and
up people can afford them.
And so if you have to
leave grandma alone
for a couple of hours,
they'll be taken care of,
but so will your
laundry, et cetera.
And you see this in shows like
"Humans" and "Better Than Us."
Do you watch any of those?
>> Shults: I haven't
seen any of them.
I have to admit, I stopped
watching TV 20 years ago.
>> REGINA: Yeah, these are
streaming shows that are very
targeted.
One is Russian.
One is British, but it's
getting into the subject
we're talking about, what
happens, A, when you introduce
these robots that
are better than us,
more caring, stronger,
smarter into our lives?
And what happens, if then
we're going to get into this,
gain their own consciousness?
Can start becoming self-aware.
>> Shults: OK, so self-awareness
itself is a tricky thing.
And one of the reasons
it took decades
to make any progress in
AI is a very simple one.
It's all linguistic.
We don't even agree on what
the definitions for thought
and awareness and memory are.
And so this was one of the
major stumbling blocks.
Now, we've pretty
much agreed that we
can make things that function
very much like neurons
and very much like brain tissue.
And in fact,
building neural nets,
we've discovered
that when they make
failures occur in
them, many of them
model failures in
the human brain,
such as types of aphasias.
And so this is one
of the indicators
that the neural nets are very
close to what nature is doing,
and we learned a lot
from making models.
The problem with neural
nets is a simple one.
If you design and intentionally
build a specific device
to act as a thinking system,
when you use neural nets,
you have no idea what's
happening inside it
and very little way
of interpreting it.
If you try to build
the same machine again,
you're going to get a
different system because they
learn at random, just as we do.
>> REGINA: With
experience and data input.
>> Shults: Exactly.
>> REGINA: I mean, you
could argue most humans
aren't self-aware.
So maybe this is a
conversation before its time.
>> Shults: Well, and
that's a tricky one.
You could do another-- you
could do hours on that alone.
>> REGINA: Yes.
So your perspective
from what you understand
is probably likely by 2050, this
will be a normal part of life,
is to have a robot of
some kind to help us out
around the house.
>> Shults: Absolutely.
But the big question
is, if it's smart enough
to understand what you're
instructing it to do,
why would it want to do
what you tell it and not
what it wants to do?
>> REGINA: Well,
that's the thing,
the whole notion
of will and desire.
So how do you write a
program around that does not
include will and desire,
that literally only includes
response?
>> Shults: Well, even if you
didn't know the answer to that
one, there's one tricky
thing you can do,
and that is to build in a
desire to be happy working.
>> REGINA: Yeah, there you go.
>> Shults: Boy, there's
a slippery slope,
because then it's only a few
minutes before somebody says,
hey, we could do
this to people too.
And that's what scares people.
It sums it up in a nutshell.
>> REGINA: Well, in one of
those two shows, I talked about,
the Russian one called
"Better Than Us," of course,
it's absolutely gorgeous.
Drop dead, gorgeous, beautiful
robot comes into this family,
and you can-- anyone
who wants to watch
can look at the
rest of the plot.
But she was
defective, and she was
sold by the Chinese in
a box without the manual
at a discount to the
Russians, the oligarch.
And the reason was because
she had her own ideas.
She was self-aware
that she was programmed
to take care of a family
and to protect the family.
So when it came time to do
that, some murderous traits
started coming out.
You do what you must
to meet the end goal.
So this brings a lot
of questions into it
too about the programming of
such things in the future.
I find it fascinating
personally.
>> Shults: I think that one of
the things we have to face is
that most people at some point
can't even manage their own
lives properly.
We all have
limitations and issues,
but nobody wants to admit
to those limitations.
And then we're going to trust a
group of limited, flawed humans
to create something--
>> REGINA: To design a program--
>> Shults: --of perfection.
>> REGINA: Yes.
>> Shults: That, that is an
extremely dangerous thing.
>> REGINA: Yeah,
that's a slippery one.
I agree.
So let's talk about the
Synchron Corporation.
So we talked about
the Neuralink,
which is putting a disk
basically right here
in the skull, right?
>> Shults: Correct.
>> REGINA: And now,
we'll talk about that,
what came out of it.
But this is a little different.
Let's talk about it-- who
they are, what they're doing,
and how far they've
gotten with it.
>> Shults: Well, one of
the early founding members
of Synchron actually worked
with Neuralink on the project
for a while.
And when he left, he had
some dissatisfaction,
which I won't go into
any of the details.
But the fact is he got
to work with Synchron.
And Synchron had a
slightly different way
of approaching it.
With Neuralink, you
must open the skull
to get the chip in contact
with a portion of the brain.
And a lot of times, you're
going to look at the area known
where the homunculus resides.
It's a model of the body.
And that way, it can
read information from it
and determine what the
movements are going to be,
make predictions.
Synchron has a
different type of device
that actually works in the
same way a cardiac stent would.
The electrode array is
inserted through an artery
into the brain.
They steer it into the location.
They implant this stent,
and it makes the connections
through there.
And you can actually
go home after 48 hours
after the surgery.
It's very--
>> REGINA: Did you say the
blood flowing through the stent?
>> Shults: That's correct.
It's like a collar.
You can slightly
expand the blood vessel
without obscuring the
blood flow or obstructing,
and I should say.
So they actually implanted
the devices, the test devices
from Synchron in 2018
in an Australian man
who very rapidly learned
how to send texts
by thinking about it.
So this is a direct
and very useful
application particularly
for people who are locked in
or are unable to move or unable
to communicate in any way.
If you can get somebody who is
totally paralyzed to the point
where they can communicate
by sending texts,
you've taken a
major step forward
in improving their quality
of life and understanding
what's going on.
>> REGINA: Well, I think what
comes to mind is a friend
of mine, dear friend,
lifelong friend.
Interesting, this gets
into a lot of stuff.
When she retired
didn't really want
to but her husband
wanted her to.
She didn't want to stay home.
As soon as she retired, weird
thing happened in her brain.
Tau protein build
up in the brain,
and she very quickly
started falling
into a state similar to Stephen
Hawking, the most frustrating
part being that
she couldn't speak
and found a way to
communicate, but her mind
was perfectly intact.
And I think she did end her life
with assisted suicide, legal.
And I think what
would have happened
had that been available?
>> Shults: Right.
Well, obviously, restoring
the ability to communicate
is wonderful.
But if you can't stop
the damage, what's
causing the damage,
it may spread
to other areas of the brain.
So it sounds like a panacea,
just put this thing in.
But if the rest of the brain
is still failing rapidly,
it's a problem.
Learning how to remove
tissue without affecting
the surrounding tissue
can be very tricky.
The brain actually has
pretty localized processors.
And if you look at it, people
say the brain is a computer.
It actually is a
network of computers,
each with special functions.
It's estimated that there are
about 250 different processes
running inside the human
brain at any given moment.
And so if you look at
it from this standpoint,
it really is a network
of complex computers,
each with a dedicated
process going on in it.
So if you could locate and
remove just that section,
then you'd stand a
far greater chance
of returning them to
a normal form of life
once you get this
implant in place.
>> REGINA: So the possibility
here is that this can happen.
>> Shults: Absolutely.
>> REGINA: You look at it--
again, me I'm big on
the soul and the human.
What was the desired
outcome there?
I don't want to be
home hanging out
in the house with
my husband all day.
So she's not, so
you got that too.
So let's talk about
the algorithms that
are used and mimicking behavior
and thought versus the ability
for AI to originate.
>> Shults: Right.
OK.
So first of all, there are
two major schools of thought
on artificial intelligence.
First is the weak AI claim, the
second is the strong AI claim.
>> REGINA: And tell
us what those are.
>> Shults: OK, so in
the weak AI claim,
it's claimed that we may
never understand what thought
and being and
consciousness actually is.
But we make systems that
can imitate it more and more
accurately.
And we can keep
adding pieces that
get better and better at
imitating it to the point
where we can't tell the
difference that it won't
actually be
thinking, but it will
be acting like it is so
effectively that it fools us.
That's the weak AI claim.
The strong AI claim is we
can figure out exactly.
We can duplicate it.
We can make a system
that does exactly that.
So while it may be
exactly a thinker,
that doesn't guarantee that it
will think like a human being.
I mean, consider all
the different species
of animals on this
Earth that have
some sort of mental
horsepower, and they act very,
very differently
from human beings
because of how
they have to live.
So there can be
any type of a mind,
but it could be valid and
alive and aware and thinking.
So when we come up
with this strong AI,
how do we know,
how to influence it
to be the way we want it to be?
And the answer is, we'll
end up training it.
We can make modules
of neural networks.
>> REGINA: Isn't that just
instantiating preferences?
>> Shults: Well, it is.
But to start with,
every one of us
comes with a whole sheaf of
pre-programs in our brain.
>> REGINA: Well, that's
the subconscious for you.
>> Shults: Well,
I mean, consider,
if you pick up a puppy
and hold it over water,
it starts paddling.
How does it know to do that?
Why is it that a baby
will start when there's
a loud noise or a flash?
It's because they're
wired to do that.
So it isn't cheating
to start with a bunch
of starter routines in the AI.
>> REGINA: So you're
saying that-- say that,
call it subconscious or
what starter routines.
You can call it collective
passed-on knowledge, DNA,
whatever you want to call it.
You're saying that that
subtle information will
begin programming AI itself.
>> Shults: It will shape
how it develops and what its
intentions--
>> REGINA: Is that because
we are responding to it,
which we respond to
subconscious programming?
>> Shults: Well, we are
responding to the needs
of our body to keep it alive.
Don't forget that
the target is to keep
you alive, safe, reproducing,
taking care of your family,
and going on.
>> REGINA: Which I think is
the point of the subconscious,
is to keep us alive.
>> Shults: That's right.
We are very complicated
machines, our bodies are.
And our brain is a
cheap and easy tool
to do it very effectively.
I mean, we are the dominant
species on the planet,
so to speak.
And how is it?
We don't run real fast.
We don't have claws or scales,
giant teeth, or poison,
or any of those
sorts of defenses
that other organisms do.
And yet we took over the planet.
And it only happened
because we can make
abstract models of reality.
We're predictors.
We go through our
lives, modeling,
learning, and predicting
what happens next.
But this also leads you to how
a machine can have emotion.
>> REGINA: OK,
let's talk about--
OK, so now--
>> Shults: Sure.
We'll get to that, of course.
>> REGINA: All right.
We'll get into that
right from this.
So the subconscious is
something, this collective body
of unconscious knowledge that
we carry with, we're born with.
This creates reaction.
And usually, it has to
do with survival, right?
So it's going to be pleasure,
fear, invite something in,
reject something.
So if the AI is interfacing
with our reactions,
it's going to be
building its own database
in terms of the reactions
of the AI, right?
>> Shults: That's correct.
>> REGINA: So it doesn't
really matter if--
it's learning it
one way or the-- it
may be learning from
our subconscious,
but it is learning the correct
responses for that individual.
>> Shults: Right.
Well, we have a value
assigned to everything
we experience and know.
>> REGINA: Absolutely.
So now let's get into emotions.
>> Shults: So prediction
is the big thing here.
And we all feel emotion
or we think we do.
And I think that I--
the best illustration is
you've been in the hospital
to have a procedure.
You're anesthetized or drugs.
And you're feeling as
they're wheeling you in,
I should be scared or
worried, but I just
feel nothing right now.
I don't feel fear.
I should feel this way.
And we've all been in an
altered state of some sort
under medication or something
where we felt that way.
>> REGINA: Or meditating.
Yeah.
>> Shults: And so
the question is,
if you know you should
feel that emotion,
but you're not feeling it.
Why is that?
And the answer is simple.
You don't feel emotion.
What you feel is the
body's visceral response
to the chemicals that
emotional thinking
releases into your bloodstream.
>> REGINA: Difference
between emotion and feeling.
>> Shults: That's exactly it.
So an emotion, emotion
is the brain's earliest
capable-- nature's earliest
capability of rational response
to a danger or an opportunity.
Oh, I better run, terrifying.
OK, so emotion is
a type of thinking,
and it's meant to
keep you alive.
So it's act in a moment--
>> REGINA: Yes, I
agree with that.
>> Shults: --without
rational thought.
And rational thoughts
are expensive.
It takes a lot of brain tissue.
Emotions, easy and cheap.
But how does it work?
It's because emotion releases
compounds into your bloodstream
that change--
the racing pulse
begins, the tightening
of the muscles, the sweating
palms, the hyperalert feeling.
>> REGINA: Adrenaline, yeah.
>> Shults: Right.
And what you feel
is not emotion.
You're feeling your
body's response
to the chemistry of emotion.
So now let's take that
to the next stage.
How do we put it in a machine?
Being predictors, we
know from our experience
what's going to happen next
every stage of the day.
We're evaluating when we
walk through a door, when
we pick something up,
when we taste something,
we know what it should be.
So you've been indoors
all day, long day.
You step out.
You're going to take a break.
Afternoon, you see a
rock on the ground.
That wasn't there before.
You go to pick it up.
You know it's going
to have a heft to it.
It's going to be hard.
It's going to be hot
from sitting in the sun.
You pick it up.
It's cold and squishy,
Oh, what just happened?
>> REGINA: Yeah,
it's something else.
>> Shults: Violation
of your expectation.
>> REGINA: Yes.
>> Shults: All right.
>> REGINA: Very good.
>> Shults: How does that work?
The machine is programmed
to become a predictor, like,
a human being, to gauge
from moment to moment
what's going to happen.
And its expectations
can be violated.
Flag is set.
It's got the basis of
the emotion of surprise
right there.
It just doesn't feel it.
How do you bring the machine to
feel the emotional sensations
that we do?
You model a body
for it, whether it's
in a virtual space or
an actual robot body.
You give it sensory feedback.
You give it the response
to increase the current
to the motors so they move a
little harder, a little faster,
automatically.
You give it the same
sorts of scenarios
that are wired into
a living being,
and it will actually feel that
if it has any sort of tactile
and feedback system.
Then it will actually
feel emotion.
>> REGINA: OK, so now
this gets us to VR,
where you're talking about the
senses now engaging with AI.
And I just can't help but feel
we got some big changes coming
in society--
>> Shults: Yes, we do.
>> REGINA: --with the
introduction of VR.
People worry about the
world's population explosion.
We just passed 8 million the
other day, well, ostensibly.
But with VR, that could
definitely slow things down.
>> Shults: Well, it could.
It could.
>> REGINA: It could.
Just because you can
have every experience
you need without
having to engage
with a complicated human.
>> Shults: And
that's probably true.
And here's why we're
limited right now.
Virtual reality
systems can give you
a scenario, can give you
objects to move around.
It can give you a world to react
in that's similar to this one,
identical to this one,
or wildly different.
But what it doesn't
supply is anything more
than the very basics,
sound and sight.
If those are the only
two channels you have,
it can be pretty convincing.
But you don't have
taste or smell.
>> REGINA: It doesn't have
tactile capabilities now.
>> Shults: Some do, some do.
>> REGINA: And that's where
they're headed, though.
That's the Holy Grail.
>> Shults: That's
where it's headed.
So how do you do it?
Well, first of all,
there's a device
that affects your
vestibular or balance
system by placing a pair of
electrodes behind your ears.
And by putting slight
charges on them, patterned
in certain ways,
it can change how
you feel right or
left up or down,
how your balance is affected.
A headset with this was
demonstrated a few years back.
In Japan, they put the headset
on a woman and using a joystick
changed her sense of
balance so she would
steer to the right or the left.
And she felt like the
ground was tilting.
They actually were making a plan
to produce these in headsets
so you could get vestibular
balance sensations out
of some games.
I don't know what
stood in the way of it.
It's not a difficult technology,
but it would give one more
really convincing
sense to the impression
that you're in another world.
>> REGINA: True.
It seems to me that technology
would be better used
to help people who have lost
their balance regain it.
>> Shults: And
that's another thing.
It will work if the
nerves are not destroyed.
>> REGINA: I see.
>> Shults: There's
always a limitation.
You can have an implant
for your hearing,
but if the auditory nerves
have already been destroyed,
it doesn't do you any good.
So there has to be some wiring
to support the hardware.
>> REGINA: Yeah.
>> Shults: But the
other thing is,
how do you get other
tactile sensations?
There were movie theaters
who would do things
like vibrate the seats, blow
smells, hot air, cold air,
or mist.
And that was probably
the closest approach
they had at the time.
Right now, there are
talks of inserting
chips inside nerve endings
that can create sensations--
>> REGINA: And create
a scent or a smell.
>> Shults: Exactly.
>> REGINA: Yeah.
>> Shults: So this
is not far away.
And some of the things
we learned from Neuralink
and Synchron and other
related projects,
one of the things we've
learned is that you can record,
generate, or playback
neural signals,
and the brain cannot distinguish
them from the real thing.
So that's on the way.
It's invasive at this time,
but it is a technology
that's going to appear.
And you'll see it
first in people
who have lost sensation in limb
or something along those lines.
>> REGINA: Well,
that makes sense,
anything that will help restore
for a person who still has
the will to live.
>> Shults: Yes.
>> REGINA: That's the thing.
So how do you see VR?
As we're seeing
it, like, they'll
have someone in the
airport giving you
free VR demonstrations.
I think Facebook had
a booth doing that,
so in the Phoenix
airport at one point.
How do you see VR?
Because it is so rapidly coming
up now for the average person.
How do you see that playing
out, the most popular uses,
the most perhaps surprising
or intriguing uses?
>> Shults: I think that one
of the earliest uses that
we'll see for VR will
be avatar bodies.
So you can tour other
parts of the world
without going anywhere.
You put on a headset.
Italy, put $5 in, walk around
in Italy for a few minutes.
And that's something that's been
long thought about and talked
about in a lot of
fiction, and some people
have actually made a go of it.
>> REGINA: Replacement
for remote viewing.
>> Shults: Well, yes, it's
technical remote viewing.
It allows you to
visit other lands
and have other
experiences with an avatar
body acting on your
behalf in those locations.
And it's going to come.
We're very close to it.
I think there are some companies
experimenting with it right
now.
>> REGINA: OK, so what are some
other uses of it that we might
be surprised by?
>> Shults: Well, consider
working in very hazardous
locations, like, power plants
on fire or places where
there's biological
contamination.
You can send in
robot avatar bodies
and live humans
on the other end.
Put the headset on, put
their hands in the gloves,
and they become the worker
in a hazard location.
Ocean floor, surface of the
moon, other places like that.
So this means that we
can take the flesh, which
is so fallible and
easy to damage,
and replace it like
putting on a glove.
We do it already.
We get in our car.
You can't run 70 miles per hour
in freezing snow on a highway,
but you do it every day.
You put on your
vehicle, and you've
learned a body image that
makes you treat it as if it's
an extension of yourself.
This is one of the big, big
up and coming expansion points
for virtual reality.
>> REGINA: That's useful.
>> Shults: Very useful.
>> REGINA: Yeah.
>> Shults: Of course, what we're
really going to see is lots
of games and--
>> REGINA: Of course,
millions of-- ugh.
Don't get me going.
OK, so now let's talk about
the word "transhumanism."
>> Shults: OK.
>> REGINA: Where
do these intersect?
>> Shults: All right.
So transhumanism, a lot of
people are aware of this,
simply means going
beyond the limits
of your body in some way.
And the very first person who
replaced their arm with a hook,
that's a bit of transhumanism.
Mitral valves in the
heart, artificial kidneys,
all of these things are bits
and pieces of transhumanism.
And we're reaching a stage
now where we actually
can enhance the capabilities
of the human body,
whether it's with adding
certain mechanisms
or extending the
range of your senses.
There have been experiments
that give you the ability
to see infrared by injecting
new dyes into the eye
so that you literally can see in
what looks like total darkness.
So this is coming, and
it's coming rapidly.
We see the fact that our body
is a vehicle made of meat.
What do we do to make it
more durable, more permanent,
non-damageable to extend
the range of what we do?
If you want real
space travelers,
you're going to have
mechanical bodies, something
that can't be destroyed
by cosmic rays and vacuum
and heat.
So it's on the way,
and we'll see it
in the beginning as medical
research to replace limbs,
damaged tissue, whatever.
>> REGINA: We've got nanobots
going and repairing damaged
organs.
>> Shults: And nanobots,
whatever it takes.
That's right.
But we're already
nanotechnology.
Life itself is natural
>> REGINA: Explain
what you mean by that.
>> Shults: So life is a process
of molecules acting together
in a certain way so that the
system gathers information,
makes copies of itself using
outside energy and fuel.
That's all it is.
I mean, every plant does it.
A germ does it.
We're reaching a stage where we
will change our bodies in a way
that the nanotechnology
of nature, which is just
molecular machinery working
together to copy a gene
and make a protein of it, that's
what's happening in your cells.
We're going to
transfer all of that
over to very much
more durable material
so that we ourselves aren't
subject to illnesses.
Or if you did break
an arm off, you
could get it regrown or
add it on in a few minutes,
and it wouldn't be a giant loss.
So transhumanism is going
beyond the limits of what
it is to be a human being.
And we're going
to see a lot of it
in early medical devices for
damaged limbs and systems.
We'll later see extensions
in neural implants that
increase your speed of thinking
or clarity of senses or memory,
and it's just going to grow.
At some point, we're going
to be merged with machinery
the way things are going.
And perhaps that
might be the solution
to an impending machine disaster
that people imagine coming.
If we're all part of the same
race of humans and machines,
then there can't
really be any sort
of a conflict between the two.
And that's what a lot of people
see as being the solution.
>> REGINA: As long as
we have sovereignty.
>> Shults: Mental sovereignty.
It's personal sovereignty.
>> REGINA: Personal, mental
sovereignty over the processes.
And as long as--
because I do believe
in soul/spirit
and having it integrated with
essentially all information
and bringing back
a piece of that
and having that animate
choices and decisions in life.
If the soul/spirit
complex can continue
to merge with this new
and improved system,
you still have a human being.
>> Shults: Well,
you would think so.
The issue is--
>> REGINA: I'm just playing
with it in my head myself--
>> Shults: Oh, no, absolutely.
>> REGINA: --because I've been
pretty very anti-transhumanism.
>> Shults: We have to
ask these questions.
We have to know where we stand.
And when you start thinking
about it, what makes you you?
And people would say,
well, all your memories.
But there's more
to it than that.
Your memories are only
half of the equation.
You have procedures.
You have memories
of your experiences.
And you have the
procedures you've
learned to make decisions
and handle those memories,
how to respond.
So there's at least
two sets of data
right there that you would need
to make your mind what it is.
>> REGINA: Indeed.
And so the final
question, because this
supersedes everything.
We know there have
been periods of history
recorded where people have
lived much longer spans of time.
So we know that the ability
to live longer, healthfully,
and so forth is already
built into the code
if we knew how to crack it.
And so the brain itself,
the spirit brain complex
has the ability to do what
we perceive as miracles.
So it would then
lend to the argument
that everything we're
trying to do technologically
is just a crutch for what we
could do naturally if we were
allowed to develop properly.
>> Shults: I would say that
that's probably a very close
to factual statement,
if not factual itself.
We learn over time
how to control
more and more of
our environment,
but very few people focus
on controlling their bodies
themselves.
During the course of
an average lifespan,
it's been found that you may
have cancer 8, 10, 12 times.
>> REGINA: Oh, yeah,
we've got cells all over--
>> Shults: But your body
naturally fights it off.
And sometimes people
go, oh, it's miraculous.
It was a remission.
Well, yes, but in most cases,
you never know you had it.
>> REGINA: You didn't
know you had it, yeah.
>> Shults: And it's when it
doesn't get cured or when
it's there when somebody finds
it that it becomes a problem.
>> REGINA: And then
you go into fear,
then your blood acidifies,
and then everything starts
in another kind of pattern.
>> Shults: Well, absolutely
how you feel, your attitude,
there's no question about
it, controls how you live.
If somebody is depressed all the
time, they seem to age faster.
They don't do very well.
>> REGINA: Absolutely.
>> Shults: Somebody's
happy all the time,
they seem to do quite well.
And it's one of those
things that they've
looked at medicine,
physician heal thyself.
A lot of times your
attitude, not just your diet
or your use of drugs or whatever
or your amount of exercise,
get out there and live.
I mean, that's the
strongest medicine there is.
>> REGINA: Enjoy your life.
>> Shults: Absolutely.
>> REGINA: So for
you personally,
what's the next big thing
that you're working on?
>> Shults: Well--
>> REGINA: I know
you're working on a lot,
but the next big thing.
>> Shults: Yes, I've got
a lot of things going on.
I have projects in energy
and in robotics and AI.
And I don't generally
say a whole lot
about what I'm working on
because unfortunately, I
tend to get distracted because
of so many interesting things
to do.
>> REGINA: Oh, I understand.
>> Shults: And I will come back
and look at the thing and go,
oh, I should have fixed
that a couple of months ago.
>> REGINA: But you're
on to something else.
>> Shults: Guilty.
But there are so many
things I'm working on.
And right now, big
thing is basically
AI is a big thing, automation
for trying to make life better.
>> REGINA: Yeah.
>> Shults: Yeah.
>> REGINA: Well,
thank you for that.
And thank you for this
wonderful discussion.
I think it's really added
a lot of deeper awareness
to not just the information
in terms of what's developing
and available but
to the questions
we have to be asking ourselves.
>> Shults: Absolutely.
>> REGINA: And you've done a
beautiful job articulating.
>> Shults: Thank you.
It was a real
pleasure being here.
>> REGINA: Thank you.
I'm sure I'll be
seeing you again.
I hope this has been an
incredibly enlightening view
of AI and humanity.
To learn more, you can go
to Shults, that's with an S,
S-H-U-L-T-S laboratories.com.
Until next time, thank you for
joining us here on Open Minds.
[AUDIO LOGO]